- Hey Samuel, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
- Thank you, thank you very much for having me again.
So soon after last time.
- Yeah, it's always amazing to have you on.
In fact, you were on just last week
in a really cool show that tons of people enjoyed
and is not yet out at the time of recording,
but will be released to the world
by the time your show goes out live.
So it's a bit of a time travel thing, very appropriate here.
But it was under the full-time open source developers panel
of like a bunch of folks, for example,
Charlie Marsh, Will McGugan, Gina Houska, and so on, right?
And you snuck in for a minute there on your travels,
but now you're back and we're here to talk properly
about something really excellent that you put together
called Fast UI, which is gonna be a lot of fun.
- Yeah, thanks so much for having me.
And yeah, I'm in a slightly better environment
for a podcast than the stairwell of a restaurant
in somewhere in Istanbul.
So yeah, it's nice to be back.
- High marks for effort there, come on, that was great.
- It was, yeah, it was good fun, but it was, yeah,
this is a better place to talk about these things.
- Yeah, well, I hope you had a good trip
and that you're back and at it.
Kim out in the audience points out,
"Hey, could you just write another impressive tool
for the next week's show?"
'Cause things are going pretty prolifically over there.
You tell people a bit about Pydantic,
the company, they probably heard of the library,
but just what are you up to these days?
- Yeah, so Pydantic's obviously been around
since 2017 originally, but then it's like,
something weird happened at the beginning of 2021.
I don't know quite what that was, but like Pydantic,
like the downloads just like went crazy.
So we were at like 5 million downloads then,
and we're now at 130 million.
So like the, yeah, it's gone crazy.
And then just a bit more than a year ago,
I was very lucky, Sequoia got in touch with me
and basically said that I wanna start a company.
I had been meaning to do that after I released Pydantic V2
that I was then working on, but yeah,
I started the company beginning of this year
and now have an amazing team of 10 people working with me.
So we released Pydantic V2 finally,
having originally told people
it would take me alone three months.
It took me and I guess then six people, a year in total,
but that was released back in the summer.
And now we're working on a platform
that I'm not gonna talk about now,
but I would love it if you'd have me back,
I guess beginning of Q2.
- Is that next week or whatever?
- It's not quite next week.
- Q2 2024, something like that.
- Yeah, I think we're gonna try and get to open beta
in Q1, so yeah.
- Okay, fantastic.
Yeah, well.
- But off the back of, so that,
without getting into a lot of details on it,
has a platform component to it.
And so we have people,
people will be logging in, et cetera, et cetera.
And I was just thinking about all of the path
and the churn of building the relatively mechanical bits
of an application again,
with, it doesn't matter actually,
if you're building it with React
or with one of the other front-end frameworks,
you end up having a whole bunch of stuff
that's duplicated between what the front-end guys are doing
and what the full-stack developers
or the backend developers are building for us.
And I guess for lots of people,
there's a Pydantic model that's kind of at the core
of lots of those bits.
And I was just dreading all of that churn.
And I had been wanting to build something
like a fast UI for a long time,
but the fact that we're gonna be using it internally
really spurred me on to go and get it built
and release it in a very incomplete phase
to see what people thought.
And yeah, there's been a great reaction and here I am.
- Yeah, there has been quite the reaction to it.
Let's see, do the GitHub star test.
It's 2.6 thousand stars and it's what, two weeks old?
- Yeah. - A month old?
Yeah, a month old, last month anyway.
- Well, it was only released publicly,
but yeah, two weeks, less than two weeks ago.
- Oh, that's right.
Yeah, you probably, so you worked on it
a little bit private and then you flipped the bit
on the public status.
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
'Cause you don't want people just to go,
whoa, what are they building?
I mean, maybe you do.
Maybe you're like, what is this GitHub repo?
They misspelled FastAPI.
I don't know what they're working on.
- Yeah, exactly.
And also, I mean, we have a team with lots of people
who've done lots of open source,
very strongly opinionated engineers.
I can't even get my team to use it
without kind of proving the value in it.
So I worked on it a bit without really talking to them.
And then was like, right, I built this thing.
Let's at least give it a try.
'Cause I don't know, maybe I'm wrong in this,
but I think it's quite a fundamentally different way
of thinking about how you build user interfaces
from lots of the tools that exist today
in the Python ecosystem.
And so there's a bit of a like education piece
and trying to understand the principle,
as well as the like mechanics of going and using it.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Well, we're gonna dive into the philosophy,
but I'll give people the TL, too long, didn't read version.
Basically, you can create UIs in pure Python
in sort of dynamic web framework friendly ways, right?
- Yeah, so the thing that I think,
and maybe I think that probably the mistake
is in my description of it,
because yes, it does that,
but where I personally think FastUI is powerful
and where we're using it within the Pydantic team
is actually, we have got front end developers.
We've got some really expert guys
like who are very comfortable building stuff in React.
But we don't want those two roles
to have to constantly communicate
to build every individual bit.
So the idea is, I think if you go down the page a little bit,
I kind of explained it,
but for a Python developer,
it's this way of building UIs
without having to touch TypeScript or JavaScript or NPM
or any of those Byzantine like massive build tools.
But then for a front end developer,
it's this opportunity to go and build
the best components you can
and allow, basically provide a powerful interface
for your backend guys to go and build a UI with it.
To kind of split those two things up
and I guess allow React to do what React does brilliantly,
which is provide these reusable components.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Kind of a framework as well to bring the navigation
and the cohesion of the whole app together,
not just a particular view or a page too,
you would say, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
So the weird bit is this principle of RESTful interfaces.
We've all heard of RESTful
and we all think we know what it means,
which is basically something to do with the URL structure
and return me some JSON that gives me the data I need
to render my view.
Well, if you look at Roy Fielding's original PhD,
as is brilliantly described in this HTMX article
that I talk about further on down here,
he's not really talking about that stuff.
Sure, he has some stuff on what the URL structure should be,
but really his principle is that the data returned
from the backend should be self-describing,
as if it should have everything you need
to go and render the user interface.
So let's say, I think that he,
they're using the HTMX example,
example of like a bank account.
And if you go down to like principle, the long version,
here we are, right?
I've linked to the PhD, but more importantly,
the HTMX article, which explains it really well.
So I think if we follow that, yeah,
I think they'll even on that page,
he'll have, there's a very,
have a jokey tone lots of the time HTMX,
but they also talk about some really cool things.
- Yeah, absolutely. - Somewhere I think
they have, yeah, here we are, right?
So if you look at the traditional JSON response,
which I think is the second one,
and you were trying to show, yeah, right.
So this, you and I as humans can read this and be like,
yeah, that kind of explains my bank account
and what's going on, but there was not enough information.
- It's got like an account number and a balance,
which is a more complicated object,
nested objects and those types of things.
- Right, it's got all the things that we can,
we can read account number, cool, that's a number,
balance, yeah, that makes sense.
But if your computer, there's not enough there
to go and render someone the nice user interface
they would want where they would have it
displayed on a page.
So if you were the engineering team in the bank
trying to turn this into a web interface,
you then need to go and have lots of very
application specific or page specific logic
to show where the account number goes
and where the balance goes and where the status goes
and stuff like that.
And that causes enormous amounts of churn
and it means that it's particularly difficult
for when you have those engineers working
in different time zones because you end up
having this spec between the two.
And then you always have this problem with software
where fine, we can get it to work,
but what happens when we come to add it?
So what's the process of, let's say we want to show
as well on this page, your like joint account balance,
let's say, just to make something up.
What we probably need to do is we need to get
back end guys to go and add that to the end point
and then the front end, and that can be deployed
and then the front end can be updated to show that
and the data's available.
That is lots of churn, lots of delay in that.
So the principle--
- Lots of coordination between the two domain experts
and then it kinda, you got that microservice cascading
like it's gotta do this, then this one's gotta be upgraded
and then eventually there's enough flow of data
through the system that the UI people can put it up there.
- Right, and it's bad in this case of like
showing your bank balance, but it gets even worse
when you have a form where every field in the form
needs to be completed, for example.
And so we basically have to deploy the front end
that has all of the form components and the back end
that receives that new form at the same time.
And we've got this Pydantic model that if we,
depending on how we've done it,
probably is used to define our form
and it might even be used to define our database.
But like we're not using a Pydantic model in the front end.
TypeScript, in my opinion, is big Achilles heel in typing
is that you don't have any,
you can't use type into runtime.
And so we don't have an equivalent of Pydantic
and so we're basically trusting that data is how it is.
And so yeah, FastAPI is an attempt, sorry,
FastUI is an attempt to basically remove that need
to like have complete synchronization
between back end and front end
by having beautifully designed components in the front end.
Not saying what we have now is that beautiful,
but that's the idea long-term.
But then the back end can basically just,
can do the orchestration, can say, show me a table,
show me a form, show me a modal
and put the following content in it, et cetera.
- Excellent.
Nice comment from Tony on the audience says,
"I originally started in Python and went to use in TypeScript
Pydantic made the transition back to Python so nice."
And so in your description, you also have up here
that this Pydantic is interesting, is involved here.
Like what is the role that Pydantic plays?
- Right, so the idea is that we're getting to,
of this RESTful UI is really that we end up having
a bunch of components in a shared definition
of some components.
And we basically promise that the back end
is gonna send data that matches the types defined
in the front end.
Well, that's all very well, but if you're not careful,
you end up not sending quite the right data.
So what's nice is that all of the components
that you can return from fast UI
are themselves Pydantic models.
And so Pydantic goes off and does not only the validation,
but also the coercion.
And it does stuff like uses camel case
so that front end developers are happy
'cause we've got every, no underscores anywhere.
And so yeah, all of the front end,
sorry, the backend code for fast UI is basically,
is just Pydantic models, which implement these components.
So it might be useful for those who can see this to go in
and I can talk through an example.
If we go into the code here and I can talk you through
like a very basic component,
oh, maybe it'd be easier if I showed it here.
So I've got the code base open here.
I'm just working on something,
but if I open up here, source and then the Python package,
and then we look into components
and we can look at like a really simple component,
probably a button, which would be a kind of understandable
to everyone, where's button?
Here we are.
So this is just a plain Pydantic model,
which contains text, which is the text you would put
within the button.
Then it contains the event that you wanna fire
when someone clicks on it and HTML type,
which matches what you can get in HTML,
button, reset, submits, and then class name,
which becomes the classes that get applied.
And then critically this type, which is a literal,
which has to be button.
And that is used by the discriminated union in Pydantic
to do the validation of different types.
And it's also used by a big switch statement
in the TypeScript to basically decide what component
I'll go and render when I get back an object.
- Right, so there's some TypeScript,
maybe it makes sense to talk a bit about
the building blocks.
So you say FastUI is made up of four things,
just so people can get a sense of like,
what's at play here?
- Right, so the four things that we have now
are a PyPI package, a Python package called FastUI,
which I was just showing you there the types for.
And then we have a NPM package called FastUI again,
it's in the Pydantic organization,
which is where the meat of the logic resides.
And that's implementing basically
the most of the components and all of the wiring
to mean that when I return a button,
the button component gets rendered.
And then, but obviously, we don't probably want to end up
using a vanilla button when we come to display it.
So then I've implemented a basic customization
of the FastUI React library using Bootstrap.
So all that's really doing is it's deciding what classes
to append to use with each component
and also just customizing a few of them.
So for example, modal, there's no like nice way
to do a vanilla modal.
So the modal implementation in the default
FastUI NPM package just basically shows me alert
saying this isn't implemented,
whereas the Bootstrap one uses a nice Bootstrap modal.
And then we have finally FastUI prebuilt,
which basically uses the FastUI package,
customizes it with FastUI Bootstrap,
and then builds it.
And that means we can go and basically return
that prebuilt React app without having to get our hands
dirty with NPM on Yarn and Vite and all the other--
- All the web packy bundling minifying,
transpiling business.
- But the cool bit, in my opinion, of FastUI is that
at its core, it's really the definition
of a bunch of different schemas effectively.
The schemas are defined in Pydantic
and they're defined in TypeScript,
but they could perfectly well be,
and really nicely, I just merged it the other day,
we now use the JSON schema generated by Pydantic
and JSON schema generated by the React types
to basically go and test that there's an equivalence
between those two, those models everywhere.
But in theory, there's nothing to stop the front end
from being built with another JavaScript library
or even with something like HTML and HTMX,
or even you could go and use React Native and build,
or even some kind of embedded device.
You could go and implement those components.
And then on the other side, and this is even more achievable,
you could go and return data that matches those models
from a Rust or Go service, and in theory,
not have to change your UI at all,
because all you're doing is I promise that I'm gonna match
these schemas and then whatever front end
and whatever back end can then communicate.
Whether that comes to pass, I don't know yet.
And obviously I built the default back end in Python
'cause that's what I know best
and where I think Pydantic's really helpful.
And I built the first front end in React and TypeScript
'cause one, that's what I know,
and two, it's what we're using within Pydantic.
But lots of people have asked about HTMX.
People have also asked about Svelte and others.
I think I wouldn't see the point in building
a fast UI in Vue because I don't think it adds much.
It's just a lot of work.
But I think there's a world where we build
a HTMX template rendered version of fast UIs front end
that could be super valuable.
- That's interesting.
So first point is these different components
sound like they are potentially a little mix and match.
You could take it all as one big thing,
or you could say, I really like the way it defines
the React front end, but we're gonna implement it
in some other endpoint.
- Yeah, I think it's something like,
it'll be slightly skewed now because of tests,
but I'd say it's sort of twice as much
front end to back end at the moment as in the,
yeah, it's skewed a bit by tests,
but even now there's more TypeScript.
So I think the simplest thing to do,
and you could do it pretty trivially,
would be to use another back end,
another language for your back end service.
And as long as it matches those types,
and you could even go and use something like JSON Schema
to enforce that.
But yeah, re-implementing the front end,
probably a bigger piece of work, but totally doable.
I mean, I did it in my spare time in two weeks,
built the whole thing.
So it's not millions of different things.
There's kind of 20 components at the moment
that are then composable to build
reasonably sophisticated UIs.
- So this is a web front end.
Like Flask or Django sort of framework,
but a way that really incorporates building the UI
in Python and validating and enforcing that with PyDandic,
rather than just, hey, file new HTML.
Let's just start typing and hope they line up.
Instead of trying to juggle all those different languages,
CSS, HTML, all the JavaScript tooling for packing up stuff,
just let's write Python, right?
So maybe you got a simple example of what it looks like
to define a real simple example here on the readme.
It's got a very interesting parity
between what is in the HTML DOM
and is what is in the Python abstract syntax tree,
I guess, right?
And visually as well, the way you look at the code,
it looks like the way it might look in HTML.
Like give us a sense of what writing a UI
in this would look like.
- Right, so I think the first of all,
we have to talk about like the two enormous,
the two most obvious pitfalls for this.
One end of the pitfall you have,
which I think is the biggest temptation
is to basically mirror all of HTML in Python.
And for those of us who are happy writing HTML
or writing React, that sounds like hell.
It's gonna be slow because you have to do
some weird rendering, but it's also just gonna be a pig
because I don't wanna have to define every A,
H ref and everything else in Python code.
It says, and there are gonna be,
it requires for start, it requires you to know two things,
Python and HTML, whereas to write HTML,
you only need to know one.
- Yeah, and also I always find these things
that try to dodge, like dodge the fact that HTML exists.
I find them, I don't know, I just,
they don't resonate with me.
I'm not entirely sure why.
It's like, we have really nice things like CSS
and we have really, there's just so much tooling
and frameworks, you mentioned BruteStrap already, right?
That just plug into there.
And if it's like, well, we're just gonna write,
recreate it in Python.
Well, it has all the oddities of HTML
if it's gonna be really high parity.
And then you just have a less well-known way
to do the same weird thing.
You know, I don't know, it just,
it doesn't resonate super with me.
- I agree, and I found the same thing at times with ORMs,
that you end up, the worst case of an ORM
is you work out what you need to do in SQL,
then you try and translate back from SQL to ORM,
and it would be much nicer just to write my SQL.
I mean, not always the case.
ORMs can be powerful, but I think that they both
can fall into the same trap if you're not careful.
And then I was gonna say, at the far end of the spectrum,
the other end of the spectrum, you have,
and I guess Django's admin view,
for understandable reasons, could suffer from this,
that you basically have a very small set of things.
You have a table page and a details page
and a form page, and that's kind of it, right?
So there's this difficult trade-off,
and where in that continuum do we try
to choose what size of component to implement, right?
So for example, here we have a heading,
which is almost one-for-one matches
what you would do in HTML.
We have the text that goes within it,
and we have the level, which, you know,
it's slightly different syntax,
but it's basically one-for-one matching an HTML tag.
But then we have a table, which,
it doesn't look very much like an HTML table at all.
We're not having to explicitly define
the table body versus the table head,
we're not having to put in each column,
we're not having to worry, yeah,
there's lots of stuff here that is much less like it.
And that's where, it's in these very common components
where there is consistent things
that lots of people wanna do,
or lots of places in your app where you might wanna do them,
where I think a framework like FastUI
gets super powerful because we can get you a table
here with users defined,
and with a few columns with some customization
on what happens when you,
how we render each column much more quickly
than we could go write out all the HTML for that.
And it's much more concise to read,
it's consistent enough that something like
GitHub Copilot will help you write it out
where you do have a bit of customization to do.
I think this is where it can be super powerful.
- It is pretty interesting, and I like the hierarchy.
For people listening, just check out
github.com/pydanics/fastui,
the example right there on the page.
But what you do is you create a,
in this case, a FastAPI, API endpoint,
and then you return a hierarchy of elements out of FastUI.
So we have a page, the page has components,
the components are a list of a header and a table,
the table has data, which maps over to a list
of pydantic models, which then help say
what goes in the field and for the column headings
and things like that.
It's pretty interesting, I think it's neat.
- Yeah, thank you.
And obviously we can add other components
like pagination that works.
I think just to come back to the top,
to how we do these views.
The very simple, and it's most simple
what FastUI's React app does,
is it basically takes whatever the URL is you go to,
so in this case you might go to slash, to the base URL,
and it prepends slash API and makes a request
to that endpoint to basically say, what should I render?
And it gets back, so this, here we're basically returning
a list of pydantic models, all that the FastUI model
is really doing is taking that list of pydantic models
and calling model dump JSON on it
to get the JSON that we return to the front end.
As I say, the front end then knows how to render
each of those, each dictionary in the list
is what it is at its core.
At its core, it's a list of objects
to use JavaScript parlance, and it just knows
how to render each of them and renders each of them in turn.
And then obviously they can then have nested other models,
all of which it knows how to render.
- Yeah, absolutely, it reminds me of a couple of things.
I have an example of this, no, somewhere along here,
I pulled it up, it reminds me of kind of what React
looks like, people have done React, you know,
you write a function that returns kind of an HTML thing,
but then it has JavaScript arrow functions, right?
But it has the same nested feel, right?
Did React inspire you to create it this way,
or not really?
- Yeah, it did, I've done quite a lot of React,
and I like it a lot, I know there are,
as a popular piece of technology,
there are lots of people who like to berate it,
but I do think React's been a powerful step forward,
and the greatest form of flattery is copying,
and there are enough other, like, sure,
there are other more powerful, arguably more powerful,
arguably more performant new front end libraries,
but everything is component-based now.
Like, React has changed, changed the sea change
in how we did front end with that component architecture,
and JSX, similarly, is super powerful.
- So, one of the things that I think,
we're gonna get to, I don't wanna dive into it yet,
but like, in React, you would say, like,
we're gonna return a photo context,
or a switch, or something that is not typically known
in HTML, and these are higher order building blocks
in the UI space, right?
So, when people think about what they're creating here
in Python, it's not just the fundamental DOM objects
and elements, is it?
- Right, so that is actually, yeah.
So, page here is a bit of ambiguity
about how we're gonna define a page.
Like, default implementation does something
reasonably sensible, it like, you know, pads it, et cetera,
but like, heading, there isn't much to do, really.
You're gonna return a heading,
but when you come to a table,
there's a lot of debate about how you're gonna do that.
And then, when you move on to like,
even higher order components, like a modal,
then that's, how exactly that's implemented is,
you know, in some sense, it's completely the choice
of how you've implemented it in the front end.
You could do lots of different things,
but yeah, the whole point is that it doesn't,
and shouldn't be, like, each HTML tag is written out,
'cause as I say, I think that would be a like,
obvious failure mode for this.
- Yeah, yeah.
The other thing this reminds me of, by the way,
just for people out there listening, is,
it looks a lot like a Flutter.
If people have done any Flutter,
you've got these widget hierarchies.
You build them, you maybe set some properties,
you add in a bunch of elements, you know,
set some children to an array of other sub elements,
and this is done, of course, in Dart,
but it's, you know, this is kind of a Python version
that's similar as well, these higher order widgets.
- Yeah, absolutely, similar thing,
and actually, the other place where I've built this before
is that internally, Pydantic core,
the Rust bit of Pydantic is effectively
not entirely different to this, right?
You define these nested structures of different validators.
Everything at its core is a, like, combined validator,
which is, in Rust terms, an enormous enum
of all the different types of validator,
some of which have nested within them,
or more validators, and that's how you build up
nested structures of Pydantic models,
which, in turn, is what these are.
We're getting a bit-- - Right.
Yeah, the validators and the UI,
they kind of, like, have a similar structure.
Bit of a sidebar, just a bit of piece of code in here,
you've got table, which is a class,
square bracket, user, which is another class,
square bracket.
I imagine that you and your team
are deeper into the Python type system
than the vast majority of others out there,
with all the work with Pydantic
and the interoperability with Rust.
What is that?
Tell people about this.
- Yeah, so table is a generic.
So you can imagine if you were doing list of ints,
you would do list, square bracket, int,
and that's basically, the point is that list
is a generic around its elements,
same as a dict is generic around its keys and its values,
while table here is generic around the Pydantic model
that you're using for each row.
And particularly what that means is that,
what it means practically is that table has access
to the class when it's deciding
what the default columns are.
So if you don't define the columns list as we have here
to say what columns to display,
it'll show all of the fields in the Pydantic model.
And the point is we get access to that to the user
before we've, even if data was empty
or before the validation has happened.
Is it necessary?
Is it slightly like, yeah,
fancy use of Pydantic types, Python types, maybe it is.
But yeah, forgive the Pydantic team or me in particular
for occasionally doing fancy things with Python types.
That is definitely occupational hazards of what we do.
- Yeah, I didn't mean it as a negative.
I just thought it was interesting.
- No, I agree.
And actually I had it somewhere else on forms
and I removed it and realized it was unnecessary.
So you can definitely do too much such a thing
as too much Python typing.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure though.
It is pretty interesting.
So let's maybe talk about some of the examples.
Actually, before we do,
just give us a sense of where does this fit
in the UI space for Python.
On one hand, we've got Flask, Django,
FastAPI returning HTML, et cetera,
where it's all on you, right?
You're doing all the five languages of web apps,
SQL or some query language, Python, JavaScript, CSS,
some other tools, right?
Like you're doing all that and you're doing my hand.
On the other end, we've got tools that are pretty cool.
Like we've got Anvil that lets you just write Python
and do a draggy droppy sort of thing,
which is really neat,
but it fits into a kind of a box for those types of apps.
I just discovered DropBase.
Have you heard of DropBase?
- I've not seen DropBase.
Yeah, I've seen a lot of these like,
get me a UI more quickly.
- A lot of them are like kind of low code.
Anvil, maybe I wouldn't really quite put it there,
but they're pretty like low code,
but then there's places where Python goes
to make it dynamic, right?
So where in that spectrum would you put FastUI
as it is today?
- So interestingly,
and one of the reasons I wanted to come and talk to you
was I heard you were talking the other day
on your other podcast,
and I heard you talking about FastUI
and kind of, I'd say categorizing it into that group.
And one of the things I wanted to come and say was,
yes, we can do that,
but the use case we have within Pydantic
is actually to go and build a pretty complex,
fully fledged application
with front-end developers building components,
but just get rid of that churn.
- Right, so more like Gmail,
less like here's a table that I can click on
and see some related table.
- Right, exactly.
And what I should probably have put in the demo
and probably where Pydantic is people most associate it
and where this is gonna be most useful is within forms.
So I don't know if you wanna go to the demo
and I can talk people through,
but like a lot of logic within FastUI is dedicated to forms.
We can do things like nested Pydantic models
all become components within a form.
And obviously we can do client-side validation
with a whole bunch of stuff,
and we can also do server-side validation,
but then we get all the fancy stuff like
if the data is invalid and you get a validation error
on the server side,
we'll then basically re-render the form
with the errors in place,
all that stuff that like anyone building a web application
has to go and implement some version of it.
At the moment, there are some React libraries
that will build you a form from JSON schema,
but they don't perfectly fit in with what Pydantic does
or with FastAPI.
And so I have built some variant of that about five times.
I still think the state of the art until now is Django,
but like lots of us don't wanna build our web applications
completely with Django because it's pretty all or nothing,
despite the wonder that is Django.
And so that's the kind of space where for me,
this like becomes a really stands out
because what would have been to do it properly,
it's days of work to get form submission to work,
get client-side validation, server-side validation,
get the redirect after your form,
none of that stuff is entirely trivial,
even for those of us who've done it before.
Whereas with the theory is with FastUI,
and in although FastUI does not require FastAPI,
the form stuff is quite tightly integrated with FastAPI
and you can get, yeah, a really good experience
of building stuff like forms.
I think that where the alternative really today
is to use no disrespect to any of the fast libraries
or any of the other things,
but I think the only real alternative right now
is implement it yourself or use Django.
- Okay, interesting.
But I do wanna go to the demo and I wanna talk about,
yeah, but I do also wanna,
but maybe before we get to that,
let's try to take a little survey of what are these widgets,
these building blocks that you can use.
Yeah, is that right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- I think I can find them here, yes.
Yeah.
So you've got a FastUI demo,
which I'll link to at onrender.com prefix.
But you talk about some of the things
that you can just create in that Python hierarchy
that you return that builds up your UI.
So maybe you talk us through some of the things right here.
- Yes, so we have the kind of generic markdown component,
which will go off and renders the markdown.
This table itself is implemented
using the markdown component.
Just one side note, the markdown and the code,
because they have quite a lot of JavaScript
associated with them,
but they're actually lazily loaded
to make the pre-built FastUI app faster to load.
Then we have text, probably the simplest one of all,
just render some text.
Paragraph, again, very simple.
Page titles, a slightly funny one.
It doesn't actually display anything on the page,
but it changes the browser title.
So what you see in the tab at the top of the page.
- It's not always easy to do.
How do you inject it into the head when you're in the body?
And it takes a little bit of integration there, yeah.
- Right, exactly.
Heading, again, very simple, like one to six HTML heading.
Code, a bit more sophisticated.
And if you click on code, maybe those who can see it
will be able to click through.
Code is there.
We get a highlighted bit of source code displayed.
- It's color-coded with class types having a color
and keywords having a color.
That's nice.
- Like you would see in GitHub or something like that.
So again, that should just work out of the box.
Then we have some components like a link list and link,
which are used in other components mostly.
So if you, the nav bar you see at the top of the page there,
that uses a link list, and then we have links.
And then we get into kind of more sophisticated components.
So the first one, you see a button, which loads a modal,
and then the button, which loads a dynamic modal.
So when the modal loads, it will make a request
to get the content you want to see within that modal.
So that could be a form or it could be customized
depending on the form and the page.
Then we have loading content from the server,
which is the same thing we were doing in the modal,
but on the page.
Then we have this SSE component.
So again, very simple to use within Fast UI,
but like quite a lot of work to use server-side events
to basically dynamically update a React component
if you weren't using that.
- So your server load SSE widget.
- Yeah.
- That provides, like you said, server-sent events,
which I don't know how many people are familiar with SSE.
I'm sure they're familiar with WebSockets,
and they're familiar with just like a JavaScript event,
but this is like an intermediate sort of lightweight,
one directional, but normally the opposite,
in reverse, I guess, from the server to the client,
sort of pushing out stuff, right?
So that's a really powerful thing.
And if it's that easy to just hook a function call
when something happens, that's pretty cool.
- Yeah, one of the things I want to try with SSE
that I think will work really nicely is LLM responses
where you get like one token at a time
because you don't want to wait for the whole thing.
- Yeah.
- Server-sent events would be perfect
for basically printing out the response from an LLM.
And again, it would be like two lines of code
to add that to an app with Fast UI.
It would not be two lines of code
to go and implement that yourself,
whether you're using pure JavaScript or React
or whatever framework.
Then we have iFrame, which, yeah, again,
kind of map, we're back to kind of mapping one-to-one
to a component.
One of the nice things to say about both iFrame and Image
is they were contributed by other people.
So I don't think I'd even created an issue asking for them,
but people have come along and added them.
It's been one of the nice things to see.
I think we had 18 or so people contribute
to the first release, first release after my initial release
or sorry, the second release of Fast UI.
So yeah, good engagement from lots of people.
Image.
- Yeah, so you've got a bunch of UI stuff here
and it just, as I look at this and I see what you're building
it just makes me think of like,
wow, there's an opportunity for stuff like,
like what you get out, not necessarily the same as,
but like what you get out of say, Tailwind UI,
where the things you might work with are,
you know, on-off switches, you know, like toggles,
like you might see in your phone
or other sort of elements that have like
a lot of design imbued in them
that people can just grab and use,
almost like a Django philosophy for the front end
in a sense there.
Is that something that you are dreaming of or?
- Yeah, definitely.
And I think there's, I haven't,
someone was complaining somewhere
that we didn't have a grid component yet.
And I think we'll do one, but like,
those bits get quite opinionated, but yeah,
like calendar, completely obvious choice, right?
Complete faff to go and implement that yourself in HTML,
commonly used, trivial to define because the definition,
there aren't that many different things to define.
You choose your month, you know,
most of us are on the Gregorian calendar, right?
We're not gonna have to change too much
what calendar we're gonna render.
So yeah, that's a perfect example of the kind of thing.
Tiles like this, again,
totally possible to go and implement them.
And again, obviously you can use,
we can provide some nice default,
but also if you're a bigger company
and you want to go and customize it,
you can totally do that.
And you can have a front end developer go through
and implement the classes that basically customize,
customize the look.
But I just wanted to come back just and show you some of
the, so that some of the other components.
So we were on the, yeah.
- This one.
- Yeah, I don't know if we have anything more below that,
but I would love to show you the tables
because the tables and the forms
are really where it comes into.
So cities is probably the best example.
- Cities is the one, okay.
Yeah, awesome.
- So this is a list of cities just for some public data set
with country and population.
But at the top you see where we have a filter
to choose by country.
And if we click here,
if you start searching like UN or something,
you'll see we're doing a server side,
we're loading from the server, the list of cities.
So again, this component to go and implement,
if you were gonna do that from scratch,
you've got to have, use some clever,
this is a list of countries.
So if you do like-
- Oh, countries, sorry, I'm typing in cities.
- You did like UN,
you'll get United Kingdom and United States.
- Perfect, there you go.
- Right, and then we do United States or whatever.
You know, yeah.
And then we'll get a bunch of cities in the United States.
Building this and wiring it all up
and using one of the, we use React Select here,
but you can use Select Two or one of those components.
It's not trivial.
You need to also set up the backend.
You need to set up,
there's like a few hundred lines of React
dedicated just to setting up those selects correctly.
And as you'll see in a minute on a form,
you can add this to a form with VastUI pretty trivially.
Secondly, if you go to the bottom of the page on cities,
you'll see pagination.
Again, not a trivial thing to go and set up.
If you've got, if you're just starting from scratch
and you wanna show like, build an internal endpoint,
for example, to show all of your users.
Doing all that pagination and like wiring all that up
is not trivial, but we effectively do the work for you
to have that component and do the maths
of which page you were on and stuff like that.
Again, I wanna like reiterate,
this is the VastUI is not just designed
as a kind of Django admin interface alternative.
We within Panasonic are gonna go and use it
for UI that we're gonna show to end users.
But obviously it also comes into its own
when people wanna just get something up quickly.
- If we have a design language or something like that,
or even using a framework, I mean, you mentioned Bootstrap,
but Tailwind or Bulba, is that one of the new ones?
Like if we're working with one of those
and we wanted to use this,
like how easy is it to sort of bring in those elements there?
- So if I show you here on boot,
so I'll show you how we customize it with Bootstrap,
which is probably the best definition of it.
So you'll see here, this is in the,
this is the, where am I looking?
This is the prebuilt version.
So this is obviously the prebuilt version
of VastUI you can get, but it's actually just,
it's a very simple app in terms of React.
This app has one, well, two components.
It has a div which contains the VastUI component.
And then we customize it in a bunch of ways.
We have a like component that we render for not found.
We have a component we render for spinner
and for transitioning.
But then these are the two that really matter,
where we can customize the classes
and we can customize how we render certain components.
So if we come in here to have this function from Bootstrap,
which is how we customize the classes,
you'll see that at its core, it's just this big old switch.
So this is all TypeScript, like type safe,
because types are very powerful in TypeScript,
but like all of the props will have this type key.
As I showed you earlier,
when we were looking at the Python code,
- It's like the button and all the different things, yeah.
- Based on the switch, we just go through,
and this is all just like defining the classes we want
for all of the different components.
Some of them depending on the exact state of the component.
So all of these form inputs,
we customize them depending on which type they are
and on which mode we're in, et cetera, et cetera.
But it's all very mechanical,
just like laying out the classes we need
for each individual case.
And then we have the other way of customizing it,
which is to use custom components.
We basically for three in particular components,
Napbar, modal and pagination,
we define our own custom React components.
So here's the one for Napbar,
where we use a bunch of bootstrap types
to render a bootstrap Napbar.
- But you could basically create a React component
that has all the settings necessary
to create a Napbar in Tailwind or whatever, right?
- Right, right.
So if you wanted to use Tailwind, what's this?
Like 20, it's like a hundred lines of code
to define all of the classes.
And it's pretty mechanical code, right?
So it wouldn't be hard at all to go and use Tailwind CSS.
And then you might want to define
a few of your components specifically.
But actually modal, I think is the only one
that really requires it to be custom implemented
'cause the default just shows you an alert
'cause there's nothing--
- Right, JavaScript, the page says,
it's like, "Oh no, the page doesn't say
"this isn't gonna work."
- Yeah, so yeah, I think this is one of the bits
I'm most proud of here is that like
how much you could customize it
and how simply you could start to customize it.
- It's really like kind of pluggable or extensible.
So you don't have to get in and know too much about it.
You just plug in the class name generator
and the renderer for exactly one.
- And so, yeah, and all of the types,
it's all typescripted.
So the types should do a lot of help telling you
what you can implement.
Last thing I'll show you is,
yeah, so here in the default build,
as I said, our custom render function
is not just a bootstrap one.
We do one special thing,
which is where we have this idea of a custom component,
which basically all it has is a subtype,
which basically you should use to render it
however you like.
So in our case, we take custom
and if the subtype is cow say,
we render that as a particular block,
like use this component here
and we print out the cow says whatever it was
that the input was from the server.
And otherwise we just go back to using the bootstrap render.
And so if you look at that component here,
yeah, we've got this like slightly silly example
of a custom component of cow say saying something.
- Oh, that's funny.
- But yeah, it shouldn't be too difficult to customize.
And then even if you're customizing
to go back to using bootstrap
for the fallback case of everything else.
- Okay, so you could almost just for one section
that has to be really specialized to some custom,
but otherwise just lean on a framework.
- Yeah. - Okay.
Yeah, this looks like something that one person
could take one for the team,
create a tailwind or a whatever generator,
class name generator,
and then put that as either a contribution
or put it up on GitHub
and then you just, you're kind of good to go.
- Yeah, I think we might actually do it.
We're using tailwind and radix within Pydantic.
So I suspect our front end guys will at some point
get annoyed with my use of bootstrap
and go off and go and change it.
One of the reasons I use bootstrap
is that because bootstrap is completely customized
by SCSS and the SCSS compilers for Python,
we have the, at least a possibility in future
to allow you to customize the complete look
and feel of your app without ever having to touch NPM
'cause you just go change basically the color definitions
as we do here.
So the default version of,
maybe I can even change it here
and as it's running, it'll change.
But if I, here you see I've set the primary color
to be black.
And so you'll see the buttons here are all rendered as black
if I were to change it,
I haven't tried this for a bit, so I hope it works.
If I commented out primary,
you'll see that all of the--
- Changed to blue?
- They've all changed to blue.
- Which is the bootstrap primary,
you know, button, dash, dash, button.
- Right, and if I changed, I got rid of the default font,
you would see we went back to whatever the other font was.
So there's a world in future where we allow you
to customize the look and feel
even within bootstrap from Python code.
- Yeah, tell people maybe who don't know what SCSS is.
They probably know what CSS is.
- So it's generally referred to as SAS,
which is S-A-S-S, which was,
is basically a more powerful version of CSS
where you can-- - Yeah, SAS and LESS.
Those were the two.
- Yeah, there was SAS and LESS,
and then we kind of settled on SAS,
but then we had SCSS, which is SAS with more CSS-y syntax.
It's a way to do slightly more powerful things in CSS
and minify it and have stuff like variables
before they were available in CSS and defaults,
and even you can do weird stuff like map functions,
and they're used very heavily in bootstrap.
But the nice bit is because the compiler is written in C,
there's libsas in Python where you can get
kind of a front-end customization
without needing the whole of Node
and the whole dog and pony show of front-end development.
- Yeah, excellent.
All right, well, I think it's got a lot of legs.
So when I saw this, and I saw, okay,
this is for web apps, and it's kind of got this,
this Python code running that defines the backend,
and it's got the UI, and it's all a little self-contained,
one of the thoughts I had was,
wouldn't it be neat if there was a little bundler
type of thing that made this into an Electron app?
Would this be possible?
Could we get something that you could send out,
or is this really just gonna be intended to be
kind of a friend of Django type of thing?
- I have not used Electron for a very long time,
so I don't pretend to be an expert.
What I will say is that unlike some of the other UI libraries
we're not trying to do clever things with WebSockets
and do all of the rendering requiring duplex communication
between the client and the server, it's pretty simple.
It's like, make a request, and the JSON contains
some information about how to render it,
and then the front-end goes off and renders it.
So it's, the result, what you get when you finish,
is very, in terms of from a networking point of view,
very simple, very conventional.
It's like, make an HTTP request, get back JSON,
JavaScript knows how to render it.
And so I don't see why it shouldn't work in Electron.
There's even the world in which we don't need
the whole of Electron, and we could,
someone could go and build fast UI components
for whatever native library, and we could get
native apps running that are based on fast UI.
Not saying that's necessarily a good idea,
but those possibilities exist.
- It is, it does exist.
Okay, yeah, yeah, very interesting.
Another thing that is a convention, I suppose,
I'll see if I can pull it out here,
is the UI, a lot of times you'll have either just slash,
you'll have slash users, but then you'll have an API
that backs it, and there's this convention
that if it's in the URL, if you have slash API slash,
in this example we were talking about before,
it's like slash table slash cities,
if you say API slash table slash, that's the data endpoint,
and then if you drop the API, that's the front end
that then turns around and calls the back end
with the API inserted, right?
You wanna talk about that convention a little bit
so people kinda see where that's going?
- Yeah, so that's how I've set it up in the default app.
It doesn't, you don't have to do it like that,
and I think we're using a separate subdomain
to avoid path-based routing and all that fun,
but yeah, the default simplest way
of basically doing a calculation to go from,
I've got a URL, how do I get the data for it,
is, as I said earlier, basically prepend slash API.
- So maybe a more general way to think about it
is for every page, there is an endpoint
that is a FastAPI endpoint, or a pair of them maybe even,
one returns the HTML front end stuff that makes it work,
that talks around and goes back to itself, right?
- Yeah, so what we have in the default app here,
and what I would generally recommend is, where are we?
We have, yeah, we have a bunch of routers
that connect and do all of the API stuff,
and I've just been implementing auth,
which I can show you in a minute,
but that's not available, there's a PR for it,
but it's not available in the demo you're looking at.
Like basically catch all endpoint,
which if nothing else has been hit,
will render the standard HTML,
and one of the nice things is that the Python library
gives you this pre-built HTML,
which will basically render you the HTML that you'll get
if I went here and I view page source,
you'll see it's just returning, well, yeah,
in this particular, if I went to 8000,
then it wouldn't be messed up by Vite.
You just get this very simple HTML,
which in turn renders the app.
So yeah, effectively you're right,
there's two, there's like matching endpoints
for every view you might wanna have,
one to get them to return the JSON,
the one to render the HTML.
What's one of the--
- But you don't write them both, right?
You write the API one and then FastUI
magically turns it into UI.
- Right, and whatever, and this would,
all of most of this, with the exception
of the form submission, would all just work out the box
with any Python web framework.
You just need to produce your financing model,
dump it to JSON and return that in a response.
One of the really nice things about this being,
the like actual data existing in JSON
is that writing a test, there's quite a lot here,
but you'll see most of it is Markdown.
So writing a test that our views contain
what we expect them to is massively easier
when we're testing against JSON,
which we can convert to Python objects and test
than it would be if we've got an HTML page
and we're running a bunch of regexes
for does this page contain the user's name?
Does it contain the word log out?
Blah, blah, blah.
- Yeah, by write type of things or those types of tests.
- Or yeah, even worse, you end up with that Playwright
and like take an image of it and see if the image looks
like the image used to look and yeah.
Things I don't wanna have to build.
I mean, they have to happen occasionally,
but like we're, and ironically,
we'll probably end up with them in fast UI
to like even more certainty
that our components work correctly,
but hopefully that thereby avoid everyone else
having to go and build them.
- Is there any concern that maybe there's unintended APIs
in the sense that like all of this stuff,
I'm sure this is probably true
for pretty much any React site,
but like a lot of the pages available also as an API,
even if you don't intend it to be an API,
like what's--
- Yeah, I think that's a limitation of any,
I mean, in some ways the data will be slightly less nice to,
yeah, you're right.
If you're a company that give people foreign exchange rates
and you want them to always come to your site,
you obviously can't render that with React
'cause there's gonna be a JSON endpoint
where someone can just go scrape your exchange rates
or whatever else it might be.
- Right, right, but you can still do session based auth
and say you have to log in to do it, right?
It's not just that it's public, it just,
there's always a JSON version,
but honestly, there's so many interesting ways
to pull data out of HTML, like--
- Yeah, if someone's determined, if it's that valuable,
someone will do it anyway.
I also think that like, in theory,
if your options are build pure React or do this,
then this has the, like, as I say,
there's the realistic chance someone's gonna come along
and implement a fast UI front end that renders HTML
and then you don't have to expose those JSON endpoints at all
and you could return HTML from your server.
We just haven't got around to building it yet.
- Yeah, sure, okay.
I guess you could maybe do some kind of server side
rendering potentially as well.
- Exactly, that's what I mean.
Whether it's Python server side rendering
or whether it's JavaScript server side rendering
or whether it's edge rendering,
I've tried to build a sort of edge rendering thing
in Cloudflare years ago using Rust
and for a bunch of reasons it didn't quite work,
but there's real possibility of doing, like,
yeah, any number of different things in that direction.
- That's interesting.
Yeah, like some of the CDNs have pretty dynamic stuff
right at the edge where you can sort of put
your last bit of code.
I haven't done anything with that.
- That's kind of what Remix is doing
and Next.js to a lesser extent.
So, but again, in theory, I mean, maybe I'm overblowing it
and FastUI will remain what it is now,
but in theory we've set up this language
of different components that hopefully is,
whilst by no means universal, complete enough
that you can build lots of common user interfaces with it
and then if it really gains adoption,
then people can go and build new backends
and new frontends and they all, in theory,
should be able to mix and match with each other.
We'll see if that happens.
- Yeah, and widgets too, right?
Kind of like see a Tailwind UI create a paid thing
for higher order widgets potentially.
Just being React already makes that,
that probably exists, I just don't know.
- And there's been a number of issues
of people wanting to render existing,
existing basically build extensions to FastUI
to render their widgets.
I think we will probably support the Repra HTML
that things like pandas data frames already return
so that you could, for example, return a data frame
and it might not be pretty,
but you'll get something coming up as HTML
and start ugly and then move on to doing those things
in an even more powerful way.
- Sure, yeah, I didn't even think of the data science side,
but there's probably a lot of cool dashboard widgets
connected to pandas and pullers
that are potential out there.
- Yeah, and charts and visualizing data
is something that I think is interesting.
There's no reason why a lot of them couldn't be implemented
as FastUI components and then, yeah, displayed.
- Yep, okay.
We are running pretty short on time,
but I feel like we should probably,
bring a little more pedantic to the side
and just talk real quickly about forms, right?
What do you think?
- Yeah, absolutely.
Let me, yes, so if you, probably easiest,
if you share, let me see, share my screen.
I'll do it from here 'cause I can also,
it's like the full screen.
- You can show more behind the scenes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- It's probably most interesting if we look at the,
how the form is implemented in the code first
and then we look at what that means for the UI.
So this is the login form that Michael,
you were just showing here that I can show.
- So there's a login form with an email address,
password, some validation, basically like that.
- That's powered entirely by, again,
a completely vanilla Pydantic model.
And the way that we return that is we return three things.
Heading, which is just like just telling the person
what we're looking at here in the demo.
And then this third thing is the interesting bit
where again, actually the model form is again,
generic around the Pydantic model.
And then it takes one other argument,
which is the submit URL.
And that's enough information.
- Right, so what you're returning as part of that hierarchy
in Python is a model form and you give it a Pydantic model.
And so it looks at the pedantic class and says,
we're going to create like an email address
and a password field and so on, right?
- Exactly that.
- Awesome, okay.
- And then when you submit that form,
it's submitted as form data.
So as not as JSON data, but as a vanilla HTML form.
- Standard form post type of thing.
- Post form, and then we have this,
this syntax is definitely slightly funky here,
but it's how we do it in FastAPI.
We have form, which is annotated as a login form,
but it's also got fast UI form,
which in turn, which also takes login form,
all of which looks a bit ugly,
but what we're really doing in the background
is converting form data into the Pydantic model,
including flattening and de-flattening the model
in the case where we have nested models,
which I'll show you in a minute.
But the result of this is, once we,
in our post endpoint, we get an instance of the login form
that we can then go do stuff with.
If I show you a more comprehensive or complex example,
this big model here becomes a big form.
And this has a bunch more stuff in it.
So it has file inputs.
Now file inputs are one of the reasons
we can't just submit JSON,
because they can be very large.
- Multi-part encoding and all those things, yeah.
- All those things, right.
And so here we have name.
We use bold again, as I have before,
to indicate required fields.
So we could, I don't know,
I've got some pedantic logos here that I'll use as images.
This one is multiple images.
So we can select multiple images,
a date field in this case, date of birth.
- Calendar picker, very nice.
Is that just input type equals?
- That's just input type equals date.
We have switches.
We have, and then you'll see here,
we have size model, arrow width,
and size model, arrow height.
And the point is that we're doing here,
and these are integer fields,
but the cool bit is that they map
to a nested Pydantic model within the big model.
And so what FastUI is doing internally
is basically flattening this into one list of form fields,
which is then what we get rendered here.
- So in your Pydantic model, you have a size object,
but then in the form, it just has the width
and the height, the one after another.
- Size width and size height, exactly that.
- If I put a requirement or a restriction,
like min or max onto the field in the size model,
would that become a client side min and max in the form?
- There's an open PR to do exactly that.
- Awesome. - Yeah, so that we will do,
but obviously we will get server-side validation as well.
- And we've only been at it for a couple of weeks,
so like it's, there's more to do, right?
But that's awesome.
That'll be fun. - Yeah, and then you'll see
in uploads, we have some quite powerful things
we can do here.
So we use the upload file, which is a starlet type,
but we can also annotate it with form file,
which takes two optional arguments
of what rule, what except to apply.
So that will, both in the browser, when you open the--
- Yeah, when you choose a file browse dialog.
- It'll tell you what size-- - You have a MIME,
so for people listening, you have the MIME typeset,
not like an extension, but you have image/star,
which means, you know, image/jpeg, png, webp, et cetera,
right? - Right, and that's understood
by the browser and then by the OS to let you select files,
but it's also validated server-side.
So if someone goes and edits their HTML
and submits a not image, the server-side validation
will check, at least based on the file extension,
that it looks like an image.
And you get back the bytes, so you could also go
to validation that the bytes are a valid image
if you so wanted.
- To read the BOM, the mark that indicates the file type
that's sometimes in these different files, yeah.
- Right, and so if I submit this, but let's say,
well, first of all, if I try to submit this,
because we've got server-side validation
of which fields are required, it won't let me submit
if this file field is not completed.
And then I think if we put in name
and we don't capitalize it in this case,
we'll go off and do the validation and come back
and we'll say name must start with a capital
because I've implemented it.
- Where's that validation?
Oh, I see, it's a function that you write.
- Right, so just to prove the point,
I've just written a validator in Pydantic
which says this must start with uppercase.
And if I then went in here and edited that
to print out the form, is that gonna now clear my form?
No, it's not, which is magic.
And if I submit that, you'll see here
where I printed out the form,
we got the different file objects
and we got the raw data all come through
as the Pydantic model.
- Yeah, that's really cool.
And so I love how even the custom validators in Pydantic,
like Python code that you wrote appears
on what feels like client side
but is really server side validation run by React, right?
- Yeah, exactly that.
And so we'll do stuff like length checks
and all the things you can do on an input client side
as well, but of course there'll also be enforced server side
which obviously if you're building anything
that is gonna be exposed to the internet, you've gotta do.
- Yeah, you should never, never trust
what comes into your web app.
It's just put it online for five minutes
and look at the log.
Somebody's already after wpadmin.php.
- Yeah, exactly that.
So yeah, and then the last thing I'll show,
I know we haven't got very long at all,
is authentication which I've just been working on now.
So this is again, it's a simple form.
I'm just gonna select an email,
put in a random password and I can log in.
And in this case, I've logged in.
It just says who I am and how many people are logged in.
If I come back to this page, it'll show me logged in
and I can do post request to log out.
And what it's doing internally is,
and again, this is the kind of thing
that would be lots and lots of work to implement
if you're doing it yourself,
is it's storing in session storage, the auth token,
then adding it as a header where we do the fetch
from the front end to the back end
so we can effectively store sessions that way.
- Oh yeah, very cool.
Yeah, auth tokens coming in as a header item
or being set as a header item, excellent.
- Right, exactly.
- Cool.
- So yeah, I hope that we've done a bit of a whirlwind tour
through FastUI and what's there now
and what I hope is coming up
and the slightly philosophy of how, why I built it.
But yeah, I hope that was interesting.
- It's super interesting and it's really early days.
I'm looking forward to two things,
to see what people go do with it,
what widgets and stuff they build.
So can you drop in, like you said,
a calendar or something awesome like that.
And I'm also looking forward to see
what you all internally release in a couple months.
- Absolutely.
Yeah, thanks so much for having me
and letting me witter on about this random library.
- Yeah, of course, good work.
It's certainly creative.
Maybe just give people a sense of, as we wrap it up,
can they use it now?
Should they use it now?
Can they contribute?
Maybe they're interested.
What do you tell that crew?
- I'd love people to contribute.
Both, I mean, almost most useful is issues saying
how you're using it, where it's working, where it's not.
There is a bunch of people who've already submitted PRs
and continue to do so.
And yeah, I think what works, works pretty rigorously
and is probably better implemented and tested
than lots of private code.
But definitely within, internal uses, use it now.
Like I say, Pydantic is building things with it now.
So look, I mean, I give the open source guarantee
that it's relatively safe,
which is the guarantee that means nothing.
But mostly because at the end,
it's just defining how you build your UI
and how you implement your session authentication.
It's not having strong opinions about that.
So yeah, I think it's the place where people should go
and try it and give feedback.
- Excellent.
Well, thanks again for coming on the show.
Looking forward to talking to you next week.
No, just kidding.
Like two in a row, I suppose.
Looking forward to talking to you 2024.
- Absolutely.
Have a good Christmas.
Thank you so much.
- Yeah, thanks.
Bye.
[The End]